<!--
A new scriv changelog fragment.

Uncomment the section that is right (remove the HTML comment wrapper).
For top level release notes, leave all the headers commented out.
-->

<!--
### Patch

- A bullet item for the Patch category.

-->
<!--
### Non-Breaking

- A bullet item for the Non-Breaking category.

-->
### Breaking

- Adapt to the fact that block decoders may fail, i.e. change the block annotated decoder types from `Lazy.ByteString -> ShelleyBlock proto era` to `Lazy.ByteString -> Either Plain.DecoderError (ShelleyBlock proto era)`. Very importantly, while `Header` decoding still cannot fail, it has to use the same low-level decoding functions from the Ledger and Networking layers; hence, we have to introduce an `error` call into the `decodeShelleyHeader` to account for an impossible case of `Header` decoding failing and make types match. We aim to remove this error call as soon as possible.
- Introduce transaction levels, adapting to the nested transactions feature in Ledger. Every occurrence of Ledger's `SL.Tx` becomes `SL.Tx SL.TopTx`.
- The serialisation of `ApplyTxError` changes in `NodeToClientV_16`-`NodeToClientV_23` for all eras except Conway (the current era at the moment). This is due to changes in the `ApplyTxError` type in Ledger. This should not impact users submitting transactions in the current era (Conway) which is the expected use case.
- The on-disk serialisation of `LedgerState` and `ExtLedgerState` changed due to the changed in Ledger. This requires a chain replay.

### Non-Breaking

- The serialisation of `LedgerConfig` has changed in `NodeToClientV_23`.
