# How to provide ledger events to client apps

## Introduction

On Thursday Oct 12, we discussed [PR #402](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-consensus/pull/402) during the Consensus Office Hours.
@KtorZ @koslambrou @kderme @nfrisby @amesgen did most of the talking.
UTxO HD came up, so @jasagredo likely also would have been in that list if he hadn't been on a bank holiday.

This document captures the key points of the discussion.

## Executive summary

- The Consensus Team considers this PR itself innocuous, because we don't anticipate it being difficult to review or to maintain or to design around (famous last words?).
- However, there is one axis along which we think it is under-specified, and so our above judgement would be revisited after _the exact necessary semantics_ of `rnHandleLedgerEvent`  are better identified.
- During the call we discussed some possible semantics of `rnHandleLedgerEvent`.
  The "simple" one (which _we think_ this PR currently satisfies) would be easy for Consensus to maintain, but offloads a significant amount of complexity to the ultimate client.
  The "complex" one relieves the clients of that burden, but would require a significantly larger PR here.
- We are concerned that the "simple" semantics would let us merge this PR, but then _eventually_ no one would actually use the `rnHandleLedgerEvent` interface because the required client complexity is too hard.
  We are hesitant to expand the Consensus interface (even with the "simple" semantics) if there's a clearly-plausible path to it becoming dead code in the near-future (there's only so much dev power available, it should ideally be allocated to long-lived aka "long-term" solutions).

## Requirements

Any complete solution for the needs of the relevant client applications _must_ handle all three of the following tasks.

- staying synced with a node when its selection gains some blocks
- staying synced with a node when its selection loses some blocks, aka rollbacks
- becoming synced with a node

The primary desiderata are as follows.

- The client can be implemented in any language.
- The client has access to the per-block ledger events, or at least the ones known to be desirable (eg calculated rewards and calculated stake distributions).
- The client need not hold its own copy of the ledger state in memory.

## Solution Space

Today's primary options are as follows.

- Use ChainSync to follow the chain, and maintain a second copy of the ledger state.
    - REQUIREMENT VIOLATION: This can only be implemented in Haskell.
    - REQUIREMENT VIOLATION: This violates the desideratum regarding holding second copy of the ledger state in memory.
      As of UTxO HD, the major portions of those two ledger states would be on disk instead of memory, but there'd still need to be two copies (later development could _maybe_ allow sharing the disk part).
    - To handle rollbacks, the client would also need to maintain its own copy of Consensus's `LedgerDB` abstraction.
    - (The [`foldBlocks`](https://input-output-hk.github.io/cardano-node/cardano-api/lib/Cardano-Api-LedgerState.html#v:foldBlocks) approach does this, but only for the immutable chain.)

- Piggy-back on a `db-sync` instance.
    - REQUIREMENT VIOLATION: This violates the desideratum regarding holding second copy of the ledger state in memory.
    - @kderme remarked that he and @jasagredo charted a path towards using UTxO HD to ameliorate the memory cost, as sketched in the ChainSync option above.

- Rely on PR #402's `rnHandleLedgerEvent` et al.
    - REQUIREMENT VIOLATION: This violates the desideratum about becoming synced with a node.
      The only workaround at the moment is to restart the node and force it to re-apply whichver historical blocks the client needs to process.
      Moreover, currently, the only way to force the node to do so is to delete certains parts of its on-disk state!
    - To handle rollbacks, the client would also need to maintain something akin to Consensus's `LedgerDB` abstraction, but more lightweight since its elements need not be entire Cardano ledger states.
    - @kderme also remarked that `db-sync` only uses the ledger events for so much, and so still relies on the ledger state itself for the rest; this suggests that the blocks and their ledger events alone might not suffice for clients.

The envisioned longer-term solutions are as follows.

- Enrich the node to permanently store ledger events alongside blocks.
    - Then the ChainSync approach above could simply serve ledger events alongside the blocks.
    - This solution would very explicitly violate the design principles of the node, since this is non-trivial logic in the node that is absolutely not required for the core functionality of the blockchain itself.

- If a client is already maintaing the UTxO map (as does `db-sync`), then the release of UTxO HD might allow that app to avoid the UTxO-related heap costs of the ledger state---it could implement its own UTxO HD `BackingStore`.
    - REQUIREMENT VIOLATION: This can only be implemented in Haskell.

- Release a minimal proxy that uses the existing ChainSync approach above in order to maintain a database mapping blocks (ie slot and hash) to ledger events.
    - This technically violates the second copy of ledger state in memory requirement.
      However, the database should be reused among clients, which would amortize that RAM cost.
    - This proxy and its database would be another point of failure in the client's architecture.
          - However, the tool's code and its deployment scripts should be _very_ simple.
            And the overall community could maintain redundant instances for the sake of resiliency.
          - Still, the running client app would need to trust the database.

## Action Items

All of these relate to the solution based on PR #402.

- @KtorZ will write up documentation for client-app developers to read that explains the system's guarantees, which are the requirements for the Cardano code.
    - @nfrisby asked that it be roughly divided into four parts: burdens on the Ledger Team (eg they will likely need to handle requests to extend/refine ledger events), burdens on the Consensus Team (eg maintaining sufficient behavior of `rnHandleLedgerEvent`), burdens on the Node Team (eg the new TCP endpoint), and everything else---to whatever extent would not interfere with that document remaining useful to the client app developer.
    - @nfrisby didn't ask this during the call but should have: requirements on the user code (eg don't DoS that TCP endpoint!).
    - One point of emphasis in that document would be guidance for how the client should recognize and handle rollbacks.
      Such logic in the client is required unless the only ledger event parts the client needs are "stable", in which case rollbacks can't change them.
    - @kderme also suggested that this should explain how we foresee the ledger events themselves evolving (eg do client developers open PR's against `cardano-ledger`?).
      (So far, all ledger events have arisen from the `db-sync` Team requesting them.)

- The Ledger Team should be consulted regarding how the ledger events will evolve once they become so much more accessible to the community.
  (See the content @kderme suggested for the document in the first action item.)

- If all anticipated clients only require stable ledger events, then perhaps there's an even simpler point in the solution space.
  (See the rollback-insensitive/stable content for the document in the first action item.)

- We posited providing an alternative tool (roughly akin to a `db-analyser` pass) that could allow the client to obtain the ledger events of historical blocks without forcing the node to re-apply them.
  Instead of terminating the node, hacking its disk-state, and restarting the node, the client would instead "terminate the node, run this tool, restart the node".
  Note that the tool only needs to process blocks from the ImmutableDB, since the node always re-applies VolatileDB blocks when it restarts.
  It therefore should be relatively simple, but a prototype would be wise.

  The tool would also maintain a ledger state, but crucially the node and the tool would never run at the same time.
  If the historical block of interest is older than any of the node's ledger state snapshot files, then it would have to re-apply all blocks since Genesis, which can take hours.
  That should be tenable, as along as the client therefore avoids falling out of sync often.
  (TODO maybe the client could somehow keep the node's latest ledger state snapshot files while it was in sync alive, for later use when invoking the tool?)

  It would be preferable to provide this tool instead of making it easier to abuse the node for the sake of re-calculating the ledger events of historical blocks.

- Esgen noted that perhaps the same out-of-sync recovery tool could be used to handle an unexpectedly-deep rollback.
  The client would still have to handle rollbacks any common depth (eg up to 10 blocks), but perhaps that's significantly easier to do than handling rollbacks up to k=2160, since deep rollbacks have so far been rare on Cardano mainnet.
  Especially in languages other than Haskel, it might be burdensome for the LedgerDB-esque abstraction to rely on sharing to avoid multiplying the client's state's heap size by the depth of handle-able roll back.
